= Funtools

Funtools is a collection of tools to help rubyists write ruby in a more
functional style.

== Requirements

Ruby 1.9.3 and later is supported.

== Using Funtools
=== Recursion

The 'funtools/recursion' file provides helper methods to assist in writing code
which is recursive in nature, avoiding issues with Ruby's poor support for
tail-call optimization.

The +defix+ method allows for creation of methods inside the current scope
which are expected be run until a fixpoint is reached.

  # Factorial
  defix(:factorial) { |acc, n=1| n < 2 ? acc : [acc * n, n-1] }
  factorial(1, 5)
  # => 120

  # Fibonacci sequence
  defix(:fibonacci_fix) do |a, b = 1, n = 0|
    n < 1 ? a : [b, a+b, n-1]
  end

  # Helper function to avoid calling the fixpoint function with boiler plate
  # arguments.
  def fibonacci(n)
    fibonacci_fix(0, 1, n)
  end
  fibonacci(10)
  # => 55

=== Pattern Matching

The 'funtools/pattern-matching' file provides the +defpattern+ method, which
assists in writing code using a pattern-matching style.  The resultant method
will test against each pattern, returning the result from the first match.

  # Fibonacci sequence
  defpattern(:fibonacci) do
    fibonacci(nil, nil, 1)   { |a, b, c| a }
    fibonacci(nil, nil, nil) { |a, b, c| [a + b, a, c - 1] }
  end

=== Type Checking

The 'funtools/types' file allows for declaring types which will be checked
against arguments passed in to method calls at runtime.  Type definitions must
be declared following method definition, to avoid the modifications to the
method being overridden by a new declaration.

  # Define a method that adds two numbers and returns a float of the result.
  def add_two_convert_to_float(a, b)
    (a + b).to_f
  end

  # Set the type definition for the method.  This method takes two integers,
  # and returns a Float
  settype(:add_two_convert_to_float, Fixnum, Fixnum, Float)

  # If wrong types are passed in or returned, a TypeError will be raised.
  add_two_convert_to_float(1.0, 1.0)
  # Raises TypeError: Expected Fixnum; got Float

=== Composition

The 'funtools/composition' file allows for convenient composition of methods
and procs, as well as a +compose+ method for convenience.  Individual methods
or procs can be composed directly:

  # Add two, multiply by ten
  add_two_mul_ten = 10.method(:*) * 2.method(:+)
  add_two_mul_ten[5]
  # => 70

  # Methods and procs can be mixed
  add_ints = ->(n,m) { n + m }
  add_and_mul_ten = 10.method(:*) * add_ints
  add_and_mul_ten[2, 5]
  # => 70

The +compose+ method will accept any number of functions to compose, and will
accept Arrays, which curry arguments to the 2nd and later arguments of a given
function:

  # Remove surrounding whitespace, capitalize, and add a '!' to the end of a
  # string.
  clean_exclamation = compose([:gsub, /$/, '!'], :capitalize, :strip)
  clean_exclamation["    function composition is rather useful  "]
  # => "Function composition is rather useful!"

The +pl+ function mimics the -> macro in clojure:

  # Threading/pipeline of functions
  # Multiply by 8, shift left, and then return a string of the result.
  pl(15, [:*, 8], [:<<, 1], :to_s)
  # => "240"

=== Data Structures

The 'funtools/cons' file provides cons cells, which allow for immutable data
structures such as one would be used to programming in a lisp dialect:

  # Create a cons cell
  cell = cons(1, 2)
  # => (1 2)
  # Access the left element
  cell.car
  # => 1
  # Access the second element
  cell.cdr
  # => 2

The +head+ and +tail+ methods are aliased to +car+ and +cdr+ respectively for
programmers who are used to that convention (e.g. from Erlang).  Additionally,
the +list+ method creates a linked list consisting of cons cells, terminated
with a nil right entry on the terminal cell:

  # Create a new list
  example = list(1, 2, 3)
  example == cons(1, cons(2, cons(3, nil)))
  # => true

== Contributions

Contributions are welcome!  To contribute to the project, please:

  * Fork the project.
  * Make a topic branch for your contribution if it's more than a simple fix.
  * Add tests for any new functionality/to verify that bugs have been fixed.
  * Send a merge request on GitLab against the working branch.

== Copyright

Copyright © 2014 Tina Wuest under the MIT license.  See LICENSE for details.
